That was me.
NOTE CONF
His last.
Me a song last that is gonna say that was
NOTE CONF
behind every song she sang on a date.
Oh, you wanna see?
NOTE CONF
She's fine.
The bad news is.
NOTE CONF
So.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
That was the theme from Outlander TV series.
NOTE CONF
I thought since we're in Scotland, we should have at
least one song involving bagpipes and kilts and things.
NOTE CONF
So that was that, was it?
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Before the lecture starts, we have, uh, uh, announcements from,
uh, from Casper and Kotlin cloud print.
NOTE CONF
Yeah about that.
Hi everyone.
NOTE CONF
My name is Casper.
I am your first year rep for Comstock this year.
NOTE CONF
I'm just here to talk to you guys about Comstock
in general.
NOTE CONF
Um, I assume many of you here are in for
accidents.
NOTE CONF
If you're not, there's no worries.
We want to get as many people involved with Comstock
NOTE CONF
as possible.
It's a great society.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of events going on.
We have Hackenberg coming on, which is sort of a
NOTE CONF
hackathon.
We have we have ponied and we have the ball
NOTE CONF
during other parts of the year.
So things like the Informatics ball, they're not actually organised
NOTE CONF
by the School of Informatics, but they're organised by Comstock.
So just in general, what I'm here to tell you
NOTE CONF
guys about is just if you haven't already, please get
involved with Comstock.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of fun events coming up.
Um, first events weekly.
NOTE CONF
If you have discord, join our discord server.
About QR code.
NOTE CONF
Um, and yeah, if any of you guys are coming
to the Comstock Halloween party tonight, I'll see you there.
NOTE CONF
I'll now pass on to Cochran, who will talk to
you about Leipzig.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Hello, everybody.
Uh, I'm coldren I'm running Leipzig this year.
NOTE CONF
Um, So this is Leipzig.
That's the QR code for joining our discord server if
NOTE CONF
you want.
Um, what are we.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we are a society that is interested in
theoretical computer science and how we can apply theory to
NOTE CONF
practice.
Um, so really, we're just a bunch of people who
NOTE CONF
are really curious about everything theoretical and especially programming languages.
Now you guys are doing this course.
NOTE CONF
Uh, in this course, there's a lot of talk about
Haskell.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of talk about types and, uh, functional
programming.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I remember when I was doing this course,
I had these questions of, you know, there seems to
NOTE CONF
be something, um, very deep and interesting here, um, about
these functions, about these types, and that there is you
NOTE CONF
can construct programming languages with all sorts of type systems.
Um, and some of these well, all of these are
NOTE CONF
interesting in their own right.
But some of these, for instance, can be used to
NOTE CONF
encode improve math statements.
Um, or do some other cool, interesting things.
NOTE CONF
Um, here is practically what we do.
So every Monday we have a workshop on the lean
NOTE CONF
theorem prover.
So this is the one of the languages which allows
NOTE CONF
you to prove math in your programming language.
Uh, we also have free pizza every Monday for that.
NOTE CONF
So if that's a pretty good reason to come along.
Um, we have we're also very curious about trying to
NOTE CONF
build our own language interpreter.
Uh, we've called it Maker Lisp, but in fact, it's
NOTE CONF
not a lisp.
That's a secret.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it has a Lisp syntax.
So you write it as a Lisp, but it's more
NOTE CONF
of a of an ML language because we are planning
to add some types to it.
NOTE CONF
Um, we give academic talks.
The first one is going to be next week on
NOTE CONF
Thursday.
Uh, but more details on that on this code.
NOTE CONF
And finally we go to the pub every Sunday where
you can meet all sorts of people interested in types,
NOTE CONF
programming languages and theory in general.
Uh, there are free nuts at the pub, but if
NOTE CONF
you have a nut allergy, You're also welcome to come.
It's not something that should stop you.
NOTE CONF
Um, so yeah, that's a QR code for that.
And thank you.
NOTE CONF
Hey.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thanks for that.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Of course.
NOTE CONF
This is, uh, near to my heart.
This kind of stuff.
NOTE CONF
But, uh, but today I'm going to be talking about,
um, I'm going to be finishing up on data abstraction
NOTE CONF
and, uh, also talking about laziness and sorting.
So I've got a lot of stuff today.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and so I'm going to be going pretty fast.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, fasten your seatbelts.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, finishing up on data abstraction.
So I was talking about, um, data representation.
NOTE CONF
And this is a summary of what I've done in
the last two lectures.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so I gave you four representations, Annotations for ways
NOTE CONF
of representing sets.
And each of them had the same six components in
NOTE CONF
them.
Sets.
NOTE CONF
Empty set insert function for turning lists into sets, a
membership function, and an equality test.
NOTE CONF
And.
And there were these four representations lists, ordered lists without
NOTE CONF
duplicates, ordered trees and balanced ordered trees.
Um and and we ended up with different, uh, efficiencies
NOTE CONF
for the different for the different functions.
And this is kind of a table showing the results.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, uh, I won't you can read this yourself.
NOTE CONF
The only thing that some that's, uh, requires explanation maybe
is that when, when we got to the ordered trees,
NOTE CONF
um, there was a difference between, uh, kind of average
case time, uh, which is in this line here and,
NOTE CONF
uh, worst case time, which is in this line down
here, the idea there being that if the trees are
NOTE CONF
balanced or close to balanced, then, then, then these things
are pretty efficient.
NOTE CONF
So with insertion whoops, why did that happen with insertion
happening in in, in um, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I don't know why that there's no control here that
NOTE CONF
I pushed out.
Anyway.
NOTE CONF
Insertion happening in logarithmic time and um, and membership in
logarithmic time.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but in the case where the trees are very
unbalanced than the worst case, you end up with linear
NOTE CONF
time for both of those, which is no better than
ordered lists.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but if we manage to make sure that our
trees are always balanced, then we end up in this,
NOTE CONF
in this nice, uh, situation here where insertion and membership
are, um, our logarithmic and equality is linear and turning
NOTE CONF
a listen to a set is n log n.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, the idea here is that there's different ways
of representing sets.
NOTE CONF
And this is not it's not just sets.
This is just an example.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, uh, you can choose which one of these you
NOTE CONF
want according to your application, uh, ordinary lists without, uh,
without order and so forth is the simplest.
NOTE CONF
Um, but these other ones are available, and you can
choose which one you want according to your needs.
NOTE CONF
Now, um, this is this is, uh, moving on to
the topic of data abstraction.
NOTE CONF
So the idea of data abstraction is that you have,
um, a situation like this, different, different ways of implementing
NOTE CONF
or representing some data type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In this case, sets and data abstraction is, is about
being able to switch between different implementations of the same
NOTE CONF
functionality, in this case different representations of sets without changing
anything else.
NOTE CONF
So imagine a situation where you've got some 40 million
line program, and in this program you use sets a
NOTE CONF
lot.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so there is a module somewhere in the program
that implements sets one of these for okay.
NOTE CONF
And then you've got uh 40 million lines of code
built on top of that with many, many references to
NOTE CONF
sets doing things with sets.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And one day you decide.
Um, there's a bottleneck in my in my code here.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think I need a better I think I
need a better implementation of sets that goes faster because
NOTE CONF
I'm using them a lot.
And so you want to be able to pull out
NOTE CONF
your, your, your, um, your implementation of sets and replace
it with another one, which is faster without having to
NOTE CONF
change anything else.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Without having to look at the 40 million lines of
code every single time that you refer to sets to
NOTE CONF
make sure that you you're doing it correctly for the
new version of sets.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, there's a hope that you can do this
NOTE CONF
because the idea of these four versions of sets is
that they provide the same functionality.
NOTE CONF
They have the same set, the same type, I mean,
the same type name set, they have the same functions
NOTE CONF
provided, you know, insert element equality and so on and
so and so at least the names and so forth
NOTE CONF
should be right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But it turns out it's a bit tricky to get
this to work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I want to show you why.
NOTE CONF
And there's a problem.
And then there's a solution to the problem okay.
NOTE CONF
The problem is that if you don't do it right,
you end up having to look at the 40 million
NOTE CONF
lines of code and trying to sort out what's going
on?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, uh, and it has to do with the
NOTE CONF
invariant that I, that I've mentioned.
So remember the invariant for ordered lists.
NOTE CONF
There was this there was this, um, condition that I
wrote down here which said the lists have to be
NOTE CONF
in order, and I wrote it in Haskell.
Uh, like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is a this is a condition which says that
NOTE CONF
everything in the list, uh, is, is in ascending order,
from from beginning to end.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you know, small things at the beginning, big things
at the end, and no duplicates.
NOTE CONF
That's what it says.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, the code respects that invariant.
So things like, um.
NOTE CONF
Oh, I don't have the code here.
So things like insertion, you put, you put something in
NOTE CONF
a, in a, in a list in an ordered list
and it ends up in the right place.
NOTE CONF
So the list is still ordered.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And not only that the code doesn't work.
If the, if the if the lists are not ordered.
NOTE CONF
So for example, if you try to compare, um, two
lists for equality and one of them's ordered and the
NOTE CONF
other one isn't.
Um, the fact that you're taking advantage of the order,
NOTE CONF
meaning you can use list equality to do testing for
set equality doesn't work anymore.
NOTE CONF
Or if you're looking for an element in a list,
in an ordered list, and the list isn't an order,
NOTE CONF
you might look for it.
And then you.
NOTE CONF
And then you don't find it in the place it's
supposed to be.
NOTE CONF
And then you give up.
You say false.
NOTE CONF
It's not there.
But actually it might be somewhere further down because the
NOTE CONF
list is not ordered.
It's so.
NOTE CONF
So it gives the wrong answer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, if the if the invariant doesn't hold, then, um,
then you might give the wrong answer using this code
NOTE CONF
because you're depending on this property.
And here's an example okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is called breaking the invariant.
So the first uh the first test here, this is
NOTE CONF
a good test.
This is what you want to do.
NOTE CONF
So um suppose you want to suppose you have two
lists of values here.
NOTE CONF
And I mean, I've just taken numbers from one up
to n and then the numbers from n down to
NOTE CONF
one.
So same same elements in a different order.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If I take these lists and I convert them into
NOTE CONF
sets using this function set okay I end up with
uh sets represented as ordered lists.
NOTE CONF
So we end up with an ordered list which has
in fact it looks like this first one here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it puts the second one in the correct order.
NOTE CONF
And then and then testing equality gives the right answer
okay.
NOTE CONF
The answer is true okay.
Same elements.
NOTE CONF
Uh I've converted them to a set.
This ends up in the second one being rearranged to
NOTE CONF
be in order okay.
So this is the way you should do it.
NOTE CONF
Here's the way you shouldn't do it okay Um, I've
done the same.
NOTE CONF
I've got the same lists here, but I don't I
don't call set to convert these things to to sets.
NOTE CONF
I just go ahead and test equality.
Um, on these lists.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Since sets are represented as lists, you know, I have
NOTE CONF
a, I have a line of code which says, um,
you know, type set of a equals list of a.
NOTE CONF
Um, this type checks, okay.
Because the two things here, these are both lists and
NOTE CONF
lists are sets.
So they're both sets okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I end up here with the wrong answer
because if I do equality testing, which is just list
NOTE CONF
equality, um, I end up with saying, no, these are
not equal, even though they have the same elements.
NOTE CONF
So they are equal.
They should be equal as sets, but they're not because
NOTE CONF
the algorithm requires the list to be in order.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's that's kind of bad.
Um, if you make a mistake like that, you'll get
NOTE CONF
the wrong answer.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Even worse, even worse, because sets and lists are the
same type.
NOTE CONF
You can do things in your 40 million lines of
code that take advantage of that fact.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if, for instance, it happens that the head of
NOTE CONF
a list, uh, the head of a of a ordered
list will always be the minimum element, okay.
NOTE CONF
And it might be that you'll take advantage of that
fact, uh, 349 times in your in your 40 million
NOTE CONF
lines of code.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, you take the head, you have a set, and
you say, I want the minimum element, I'll just take
NOTE CONF
the head.
It'll be the minimum element.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And then you and then, uh, you know, two months
later, you you decide to change to a version of
NOTE CONF
set that uses balanced binary trees or something.
Okay, so all of those, all of those uses of
NOTE CONF
head, they were formally okay because you're taking the head
of a list.
NOTE CONF
So now they will fail to type check.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, that's kind of a pain, but at least you
automatically, you know, Haskell will tell you automatically all of
NOTE CONF
the, you know, however many hundred times it is that
you made that, that you did that and you can
NOTE CONF
go in and fix all of those.
But suppose that instead of, um, instead of replacing your,
NOTE CONF
your representation of from, instead of changing from ordered lists
to, uh, you know, balanced binary tree, suppose you instead
NOTE CONF
decide to change the order so that instead of being
ascending order, it's descending order.
NOTE CONF
So big things at the beginning, small things at the
end.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Then suddenly, um, the head of the list is the
NOTE CONF
maximum element and not the minimum element.
Okay, so instead of instead of and it won't and
NOTE CONF
it won't fail to type check because they're still lists
okay.
NOTE CONF
So instead of instead of giving you a type error,
it'll just give you the wrong answer, okay.
NOTE CONF
And in order to find out okay, you get bugs.
In order to track down these bugs, you have to
NOTE CONF
look at every, uh, every time you used the function
head in your program.
NOTE CONF
40 million lines of code.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Which might be quite a lot of times.
Right?
NOTE CONF
You don't want to have to do that.
You don't want to have to debug your code because
NOTE CONF
you because you've been sloppy and, and and use things,
um, you know, basically breaking the invariant and, and getting
NOTE CONF
unauthorised access to a representation that, um, that you shouldn't,
that you shouldn't be, you know, Misusing and say, so
NOTE CONF
what do you do?
What's the solution to this problem?
NOTE CONF
Okay, but one solution is you write documentation.
And in this documentation, you know, lots of lots of
NOTE CONF
documents and in big bold letters it says don't apply.
Head to sets and make sure that all arguments of
NOTE CONF
set functions satisfy the invariant.
Okay, big bold letters um, large print.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that would fix the problem because everybody always reads
NOTE CONF
all the documentation and does exactly what it says, right?
Wrong.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Of course not.
NOTE CONF
Um, you need a different solution.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Haskell, um, you know, the type checker makes sure you
don't make certain kinds of mistakes, and you can and
NOTE CONF
you can take advantage of the type checker here to,
um, to avoid making these kinds of mistakes by by
NOTE CONF
being a bit clever Okay.
Uh, we can we can use Haskell's type system, um,
NOTE CONF
to, um, to avoid the possibility of breaking the abstraction.
Um, let me show you another example.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is just the same thing, but for for
for binary trees.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'm using the binary trees that are not the
the balanced version.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't matter.
Same applies to that okay.
NOTE CONF
So binary trees have to be in order okay.
The the for every node everything on the left has
NOTE CONF
to be uh, smaller than the node.
And everything on the right has to be larger than
NOTE CONF
the node for every node in the tree, which is
what this invariant says.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And our trees represented using um two constructors nil and
NOTE CONF
and node.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And all of our functions maintain this invariant.
And functions like uh uh, membership test require that the
NOTE CONF
trees have this structure, um, this order.
Otherwise they give the wrong answer again.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so here is exactly the same kind of thing
NOTE CONF
happening with trees.
Um, instead of, instead of, um, uh, properly constructing down
NOTE CONF
here the bad the bad example here, instead of constructing
t using the functions that I have on trees like
NOTE CONF
insert.
And so I just, um, I just build a tree
NOTE CONF
using node and nil just using the constructors.
And the tree that I build here, um, doesn't respect
NOTE CONF
the invariant.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if you look at the, um, I mean, what
this tree looks like, it has three at the top.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it has three at the top, it has one
down here and it has two down here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And and that doesn't respect the invariant because two is
NOTE CONF
smaller than three.
And, uh, stuff over here is supposed to be larger
NOTE CONF
than the label.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this breaks the invariant.
The the the equality test will give the wrong answer.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's just the same thing happening again with um
NOTE CONF
with with um trees.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so what's the solution?
Um, it's to add um, and Haskell, this is the
NOTE CONF
solution anyway, the, um, the, uh, the solution is to
add in the case of lists, that's add a hidden
NOTE CONF
constructor.
And what do I mean by that?
NOTE CONF
Wait a second.
What do I mean by that?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, I've replaced so if we go back a couple
NOTE CONF
of slides here.
So I had type set a equals list of a
NOTE CONF
okay for my ordered lists I replace that.
Oops I replaced that with this algebraic data type which
NOTE CONF
is the same, except that it uses a constructor to
turn a list into a set.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so there's a function called mixed set here that
takes a it takes a list and it produces a
NOTE CONF
set.
So lists are not sets.
NOTE CONF
Uh, sets are lists packaged up with this constructor okay.
If you don't package it up using the constructor it's
NOTE CONF
it's it's a list.
If you package it up it's a set.
NOTE CONF
So these are different types.
So that's a constructor.
NOTE CONF
And it's hidden because um in this list of things
that I export from the um from the module, it's
NOTE CONF
not it's not there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I only export the things that are mentioned here.
And I don't export this constructor because it's not mentioned
NOTE CONF
there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
I'll just.
NOTE CONF
I'll quickly say you have to change.
You have to change the code.
NOTE CONF
Um, to, to sprinkle this constructor in all over the
place.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, so, uh, well, I'll just, you know, for example,
NOTE CONF
in insert, it appears twice here.
This is, this is a matter of, uh, unpacking and
NOTE CONF
repacking your lists into sets and so forth.
Okay, so same code, but with some constructors sprinkled throughout.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But what's the advantage of this?
NOTE CONF
I'll just I'll be very quick because I have to
get through this to get to the next topic.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, the advantage is, um, I can't break the invariant
NOTE CONF
now after having done this.
Okay, so remember my bad test from before where I
NOTE CONF
took two, ordered, where I took two lists and tried
to compare them for equality and one of them was
NOTE CONF
not an ordered list.
And so I shouldn't have been doing that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, what I'll get now is a type error rather
NOTE CONF
than the wrong answer.
Okay, the type error is okay.
NOTE CONF
Wrong answers are bad because you don't know them in
case unless you look at them.
NOTE CONF
Look at your results very carefully.
Um, type errors are kind of good because it tells
NOTE CONF
you there's something wrong here.
You better fix it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so it tells me here that I can't do
this equality test because, um, it's expecting type set and
NOTE CONF
it's being given, uh, type list of n.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It says that twice.
Once for s and once for t.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is a this is a this is uh,
NOTE CONF
doesn't type check okay.
Because, um, because I'm using lists here and not and
NOTE CONF
not sets.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But I'm much more clever than Haskell.
And so, um, and so I say, aha, I need
NOTE CONF
to apply this mixed set constructor to turn these lists
into sets.
NOTE CONF
And that'll allow me to do this.
Okay, so here's my same example.
NOTE CONF
It's the same as what I had a second ago,
except I've put mix set here and here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Alas, Haskell is cleverer than I am.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it tells me.
No, you can't do that because mixed set is, uh,
NOTE CONF
is not in scope.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's hidden.
It's it's hidden.
NOTE CONF
It's inside the module.
It's only usable inside the module, not outside the module.
NOTE CONF
This is outside the module.
And this is this is in my 40 million lines
NOTE CONF
of code where I'm using, uh, sets, you know, uh,
it's given to me and I'm using it.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not inside the module.
I don't have access to mixed sets.
NOTE CONF
So again, I get an error.
It doesn't allow me to do this.
NOTE CONF
So this is protecting the abstraction.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this.
Let me see much time I have.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is doing the same thing with, uh, with trees.
NOTE CONF
Um, in this case, I don't have to add new
constructors because they're already.
NOTE CONF
They're nil nil in node.
Okay, I just don't export them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I'll just I'll just, uh, go to the punch
NOTE CONF
line again.
If I try to do the bad thing that I
NOTE CONF
tried to do before.
Uh, breaking the invariant.
NOTE CONF
I won't be able to do that because those constructors,
they haven't been exported.
NOTE CONF
They're not available.
I can't build this tree.
NOTE CONF
And Haskell catches my mistake.
Okay, so this is this is the secret of, uh,
NOTE CONF
of abstraction.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, hide the constructor.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so here's two versions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The first version, uh, was what I had before where
I've, uh, defined, uh, sets as being lists without this
NOTE CONF
hidden constructor.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Wait a minute.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
This is the bottom one.
The bottom one is if I.
NOTE CONF
If I export the constructor, then I get mistakes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In the top one is where I'm, uh, I've, uh,
hidden the constructor.
NOTE CONF
And so instead of, instead of getting wrong answers, I
get a an error message from Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so that was for ordered lists.
NOTE CONF
And here's the same thing for ordered trees.
I can either hide the constructor like I've done here,
NOTE CONF
and then I get an error message when I try
to do something I shouldn't be doing, or else I
NOTE CONF
can export the constructor.
This is the syntax you use for that in in
NOTE CONF
Haskell, uh, exporting the constructor.
And then I'm allowed to build this tree.
NOTE CONF
That's, that's, that's doesn't satisfy the invariant.
And I get wrong answers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's, uh, that's the secret of abstraction.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'll just, uh, go to the picture that's
supposed to, um, remind you of this, um, of this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so this is like the situation where you were
NOTE CONF
a small child and you had a, a sibling, um,
and, um, and you had some toy that was very
NOTE CONF
special.
And it was your toy, and only you were allowed
NOTE CONF
to play with this toy.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So your your brother or sister couldn't, couldn't, uh, couldn't
play with this toy, okay?
NOTE CONF
Because it was yours.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So that's like the that's like the constructors in the
data abstraction.
NOTE CONF
So you keep them to yourself.
They're only for use inside the private world of your
NOTE CONF
of your data abstraction inside this module that's representing that,
that implements the representation of the data type.
NOTE CONF
And outside they're not available because it's mine.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Like like here.
And so what this that's what this allows you to
NOTE CONF
do is create data abstractions in modules.
Uh, you know, some of them are more efficient than
NOTE CONF
others.
And you can just rip out ones that that aren't
NOTE CONF
performing the way you want them to and put in
others that are better and provided the behaviour is the
NOTE CONF
same.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, everything works.
You don't have to check the million lines of code.
NOTE CONF
Nothing else needs to change.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's, um, and that's, uh, the idea of data
abstraction.
NOTE CONF
And you can do this in other languages as well.
In ML sorry.
NOTE CONF
In in Haskell it's nice because it, it, it automatically,
um, prevents you from making certain kinds of mistakes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Are there any questions about that?
NOTE CONF
I'm going at kind of breakneck speed here because I
want to get to another topic, but I can.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
No, sorry, I thought I saw a hand, but there
NOTE CONF
wasn't one anybody.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to I'm going to switch to the next
topic then.
NOTE CONF
All right.
This is only going to take half an hour or
NOTE CONF
21 minutes actually.
Um, so this is about lazy evaluation and how computation
NOTE CONF
using lazy evaluation relates to normal computation.
And I'm going to say a little bit about sorting
NOTE CONF
lists as well.
And this is this.
NOTE CONF
This is a shorter lecture.
And so it fits.
NOTE CONF
It fits.
Now um, there's no reading associated with this because the
NOTE CONF
material on this and the textbook is sprinkled throughout.
Um, so you will have already encountered the things that
NOTE CONF
are relevant to this in reading that you've done already.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you know, by now Haskell uses lazy evaluation.
So that allows you to do computations with infinite lists
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
It's rather an unusual choice, but it allows us to
NOTE CONF
do certain cool things.
And um, how does this work?
NOTE CONF
Um, so it works by never computing the whole infinite
data structure, because of course that would be impossible.
NOTE CONF
Um, it computes just what it needs to give to
give the answer that you're looking for.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you're if you're doing some computation on infinite
NOTE CONF
data structure, but you're only interested in like the 47th
element of this of this infinite list.
NOTE CONF
Then only the first 47 elements of the list will
be computed, and then you can reach in and pick
NOTE CONF
out the 47th one, and the rest of it is
never computed.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The way it works is that Haskell stores, um, uh,
NOTE CONF
Haskell stores code in place of values, um, uh, which
when you run it gives you the value.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It doesn't do that always, but it does it in,
NOTE CONF
in, um, in the places where it needs to do
in order to be able to deal with these infinite
NOTE CONF
computations and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, it, it stores the code, it evaluates the
code when it needs the value and only when it
NOTE CONF
needs the value.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the code that, that when it runs the code
to produce the value if that, if that code would
NOTE CONF
produce, um, an infinite data structure as a value, it
only produces enough of that data structure to do the
NOTE CONF
next step in the computation.
So for example, it's an infinite list.
NOTE CONF
It'll produce maybe the head and then a piece of
code representing, you know, the computation needs to do to
NOTE CONF
get the tail.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's only computing what it needs to make progress
by storing code in place of data.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can't see this when you're writing programs.
NOTE CONF
You can't access the code, but you can see the
effect because of the fact that that things are you
NOTE CONF
know, they don't they don't run forever.
And in fact, sometimes they're surprisingly they're fast in ways
NOTE CONF
that you're surprised by.
Okay, so here's a here's a kind of really stupid
NOTE CONF
example, but it illustrates what I want to what I
want to show you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Imagine you want to search for the first odd number.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, what is it?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Then the answer is one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But here's a here's a here's a really stupid program
for finding that the number one is the first odd
NOTE CONF
number.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, you I've written three versions of this ho
for higher order comp for list comprehension and rec for
NOTE CONF
recursive.
Okay, so, um, this program, it takes the list of
NOTE CONF
numbers from zero up to n.
It filters them to get out the to get the
NOTE CONF
odd ones, and then it takes the first one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So imagine n is, is uh, uh, 30 trillion or
something like that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this produces this enormous, enormous list.
NOTE CONF
Filters out all the odd ones okay.
There's only 15 trillion of them.
NOTE CONF
If there are 30 trillion in this list and then
it takes the first one, it's the answer is one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's a pretty inefficient way to compute the number one
NOTE CONF
okay.
But that's what this program does.
NOTE CONF
And this comprehension version does the same thing, essentially just
written in different syntax.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This, this, uh, this bit of code, um, computes all
NOTE CONF
of the odd numbers from zero up to n, and
then you pick the first one and it's one.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm not going to go into the details of
this, but this is, this is doing it recursively by
NOTE CONF
searching.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so in a non lazy language, um, these two,
these first two would take time that's proportional to the
NOTE CONF
to the number n okay.
If you, if you want to filter out, uh, you
NOTE CONF
know, the first from the first million numbers, if you
want to filter out the odd numbers of the first
NOTE CONF
billion numbers, okay, it'll be the size, you know, the
number million or billion or whatever, that will be the
NOTE CONF
size of the of the data structures you're dealing with
here.
NOTE CONF
And you have to you have to go through all
of them, you know, for example, to filter out the
NOTE CONF
odd ones.
okay.
NOTE CONF
So linear in n okay.
Whereas I won't go into the details here.
NOTE CONF
But this recursive, this recursive searching function will return the
result in a couple of steps because it only looks
NOTE CONF
at at zero and one, and then it stops because
that's a that's an odd number.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is this this third one is constant okay.
NOTE CONF
But um, if you actually run these programs, well first
of all, if you run it with large value of
NOTE CONF
N, it'll all three of them will, will come back
immediately because, um, uh, it's so fast that, um, that
NOTE CONF
you can't see that it's taking up time.
I forgot to say here, this is a way in
NOTE CONF
Haskell that you can ask it to tell you how
fast things are going, and then you get reports on
NOTE CONF
time and space like this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is, uh, setting statistics on is what this says.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
So it's telling you this takes zero seconds.
This is the higher order version.
NOTE CONF
Here's another.
Here's the other version that also takes zero seconds, and
NOTE CONF
the recursive version also takes zero seconds.
And if you try this, if you say, well, okay,
NOTE CONF
uh, ten.
Let's see, 1 million is not a big enough number.
NOTE CONF
Let's try, uh, you know, 1 trillion or something.
It won't make any difference.
NOTE CONF
It'll still, uh, return immediately.
It will still take zero seconds because it doesn't compute
NOTE CONF
these big lists because of lazy evaluation.
Okay, so that's, uh, that's one interesting thing, okay, about
NOTE CONF
lazy evaluation, uh, things that are that look inefficient or
sometimes, uh, really efficient.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, this is how the recursion version works.
NOTE CONF
It takes it takes three steps to get to the
answer.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's how the higher order version works, where the
notation here putting things inside a box is my way
NOTE CONF
of saying that it's not this value, it's the code
for producing this value.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so if you want H0 of of a million,
you'll, you'll take, um, you know, it's the right hand
NOTE CONF
side here and the right and, and the list is
from zero up to a million.
NOTE CONF
But it's code for that list.
It's not the list itself.
NOTE CONF
It's code for producing that list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, okay.
The, the the composition here changes a little bit.
NOTE CONF
And then, and then at this stage you need to
actually look and see what's in this list.
NOTE CONF
And so you evaluate the code enough to give you
the head of the list okay.
NOTE CONF
Head of list is zero.
And then the rest of the list.
NOTE CONF
So cons and then code for the rest of the
list.
NOTE CONF
So the numbers from one up to a million.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
Zero is not odd.
So it gets thrown away.
NOTE CONF
I've actually left out a step or two here gets
thrown away.
NOTE CONF
You evaluate this thing again to give you the list
containing one cons code for the rest of the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay, one is odd.
So, uh, you know, so the filter, um, allows it
NOTE CONF
through.
And, um, and that ends up being the answer.
NOTE CONF
And you don't ever have to evaluate the rest of
this, okay?
NOTE CONF
If you look at these steps okay, one is the
answer here.
NOTE CONF
Uh, because you're doing a take one of this list
of this big list, and you only want the first
NOTE CONF
element.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this is showing how it's not evaluating this
whole thing.
NOTE CONF
And in addition to this, there's, um, okay, there's some
overhead involved in doing lazy evaluation, so you have to
NOTE CONF
be careful.
Uh, Haskell has to be careful where it's applying this
NOTE CONF
kind of packaging things up as code and and evaluating
them when required.
NOTE CONF
Um, it does very clever analysis of your code to
decide where the places are that it needs to put
NOTE CONF
in, um, code instead of values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't do it everywhere.
It does it in the place where, um, there there
NOTE CONF
could be a problem.
Um, the analysis is called strictness analysis.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it avoids most of the overhead, uh, of,
of doing lazy evaluation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's one thing I wanted to show you.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm going to skip this part, and I'll just
say, um, uh, there's a situation in programming where you,
NOTE CONF
um, you have a choice.
Very often a choice between simple code that's slow and
NOTE CONF
complicated code that's fast.
It's like going shopping.
NOTE CONF
You can buy something that's cheap and not so good,
and it breaks very quickly.
NOTE CONF
Or you can buy something expensive and, you know, high
quality and it lasts forever.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You get a choice.
NOTE CONF
Um, and you can decide there's a trade off whether
you pick, you know, cheap and, and and, and and
NOTE CONF
flimsy or expensive and high quality.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The big wins.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is so this is what it's like in programming.
Simple and slow, complex and fast.
NOTE CONF
Big win is when you can find a way to
be both simple and fast.
NOTE CONF
So that's like cheap and high quality.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's a bargain.
Um, and uh, uh, you know, so in this case,
NOTE CONF
for example, this complicated recursive program, you'd expect it to
take to be really fast compared with this, with this,
NOTE CONF
um, simple high order program.
Um, but in fact, it isn't.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is the result of using lazy evaluation and
NOTE CONF
this clever on strictness analysis that that Haskell does for
you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Simple is good because simple means you don't have to
NOTE CONF
think very hard to, to make it right.
And of course, fast is good.
NOTE CONF
That's clear.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that?
I'm going to say something about sorting now.
NOTE CONF
This is a this is a very quick lecture with
different topics okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be showing you some sorting algorithms.
So what's sorting.
NOTE CONF
It's about arranging a list into ascending order.
And this is a very common thing that you do
NOTE CONF
okay.
In in in computing okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you know, dictionaries are in alphabetical order.
I mean, nobody uses dictionaries anymore on paper, but, um,
NOTE CONF
in the old days, you had a book and you
would find things by by looking.
NOTE CONF
And it only was possible to find things because the
words were in order.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, there's lots of other situations where you need to
NOTE CONF
put things in order, and there are different ways of
doing it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so I'll just want to show you three algorithms
NOTE CONF
for doing sorting.
And the first one is called insertion sort.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This this top thing is about fold.
NOTE CONF
You already know about fold.
Um, this is insertion sort and it happens to use
NOTE CONF
fold.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The idea of insertion sort is, uh, you have a
list of values, and they're not in any particular order.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's let's imagine that there are numbers, lots of
numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the way to sort this list of numbers is
NOTE CONF
that you take another list which starts off being empty,
and you put each of the numbers from this, from
NOTE CONF
this unordered list into this new list, one at a
time.
NOTE CONF
Keeping them, keeping the new list in order as you
do it.
NOTE CONF
So you're doing insert.
Remember the insert function from our ordered list?
NOTE CONF
Okay, it looks for the right place to put each
number, and then it puts it there so that the
NOTE CONF
list is kept in ascending order.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so if you do that for all of the
all of the numbers in your unordered list, you put
NOTE CONF
them into this new list, maintaining the order.
In the end, all of the numbers will be there
NOTE CONF
and they'll be in ascending order.
Okay, that's the idea of insertion sort named insertion sort
NOTE CONF
because of the fact that it's using this sum, this
function insert that you've seen already from.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
The earlier part of the lecture, I think on Monday
NOTE CONF
or whenever it was.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, and this is code which sort of repeatedly does
that.
NOTE CONF
Um, using fold starting from the empty list Okay.
That's insertion sort.
NOTE CONF
So how much time does this take?
Let's look at the, uh, at the at the running
NOTE CONF
time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's, um.
Does anybody actually have a guess?
NOTE CONF
Does anybody n squared, I think I just heard yeah.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's it's quadratic.
It's n squared.
NOTE CONF
Because actually because I told you it was uh no
I didn't.
NOTE CONF
Maybe I did.
Anyway, um, insert is linear.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because, uh, you're putting a new element into a list.
NOTE CONF
You have to look for the right place to put
it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you have to look at everything in the list
NOTE CONF
potentially.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And you have to do that for every one of
the elements from your original list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, in fact, it's one plus two plus three
NOTE CONF
plus four plus dot dot dot plus n steps, which
is actually n times n minus one over two, but
NOTE CONF
that ends up being n squared with a with a
constant um, constant factor.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So insertion sort.
NOTE CONF
Quadratic.
That's not very good as a sorting method, but it's
NOTE CONF
uh but it's simple.
Um, here's another sorting method.
NOTE CONF
It's called quicksort.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Quicksort is uh, is a so-called divide and conquer method.
What it does is it takes it takes a list.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here's here's a list.
Ignore the first.
NOTE CONF
Ignore the first line.
I'll come back to that.
NOTE CONF
It takes a list.
And it, uh, first, um, filters out all the things
NOTE CONF
in the list.
Okay, well, it takes a list.
NOTE CONF
It looks at the first element.
Why?
NOTE CONF
It filters out all the things that are smaller than
why In one list.
NOTE CONF
In another list, it filters all the things that are
bigger than Y, and then it sorts both of those
NOTE CONF
lists and then joins them together with Y in the
middle.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so here's my unordered list.
Here's the stuff that's smaller than y.
NOTE CONF
Here's the stuff that's bigger than y.
Here's y in the middle I sort both of these.
NOTE CONF
I put them together.
I ended up with a sorted list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, that's called quicksort.
NOTE CONF
It was invented by Tony Hoare, who was one of
the people whose pictures I showed at the beginning of
NOTE CONF
the lecture on Monday a week ago.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
How fast is this?
I mean, did you understand what I just explained as
NOTE CONF
what it did?
Very hand-wavy sort of explanation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, how much time does this take?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If you're lucky.
NOTE CONF
And this turns out to be the average case.
This is n log n time okay.
NOTE CONF
And I'll show a diagram later that explains why that's
the case.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, because if you're lucky, each time you do the,
NOTE CONF
um, this breaking down the list into two sublists, you're,
you're roughly, uh, you're ending up with two lists, which
NOTE CONF
are roughly half the length of the original list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then on the next, on the next time you
apply Q sort, it's going to be a quarter of
NOTE CONF
the, the length of the original list and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you're having the length of the sublists each time.
Um, the worst case is a is a list which
NOTE CONF
is already sorted, in which case it's quadratic.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is, uh, this is sometimes very good and
sometimes not so great.
NOTE CONF
Not sometimes just as bad as insertion sort.
Well, let me explain the first line.
NOTE CONF
Um, it turns out that insertion sort is faster than
quicksort for a very small lists.
NOTE CONF
And so I can add.
I can add something here which says um before doing
NOTE CONF
quicksort, look and see how long my list is.
If it's if it's less than a threshold, just do
NOTE CONF
insertion sort.
Otherwise do quicksort.
NOTE CONF
And of course this is recursive.
So it means once the list gets small enough I
NOTE CONF
will be using insertion sort on all of these sub
lists.
NOTE CONF
That's the small sub lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Third method.
It's called merge sort.
NOTE CONF
It always breaks the problem into two lists which are
half the length of the original lists.
NOTE CONF
Okay I'm just going to explain what this does without
going line by line through it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So given given a list it just breaks the list
NOTE CONF
into two lists.
The the first, the first half and the second half.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's what that's what is happening here.
NOTE CONF
And here, where M is, uh, M is half the
length of the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it takes those.
NOTE CONF
It sorts them.
So then you have two lists which are sorted and
NOTE CONF
then it merges them, which is what this code does.
What is merge?
NOTE CONF
Merge is a is a function which takes two sorted
lists and produces a sorted list as its result.
NOTE CONF
And it's kind of like imagine shuffling, um, you know,
you shuffle a deck of cards, you split into half,
NOTE CONF
and then you and then you interleave them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But it's a sort of it's a sort of interleaving
thing which looks to see where each element should go.
NOTE CONF
But you're only ever comparing the lists.
You're only ever having to look at the first thing
NOTE CONF
on the list and so forth.
It's, uh, it ends up being linear.
NOTE CONF
Linear time.
You don't have to compare every value with every other
NOTE CONF
value.
You only have to compare the values at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
So you're sort of you're sort of, um, doing something
like that.
NOTE CONF
But at each point you decide whether, okay, here's my,
here's my two lists.
NOTE CONF
Uh, they're going to go sort of together like that.
But at each point you're comparing to see whether, whether
NOTE CONF
this should go here or here or maybe here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You never have to compare this value with some value
down here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is linear.
NOTE CONF
And this ends up being always n log n.
Again I've got a um a kind of, uh, threshold
NOTE CONF
thing at the beginning here, uh, to use insertion sort
if it's very short.
NOTE CONF
And um, and here is the picture I promised y
y these are n log n.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You're breaking things into Into.
NOTE CONF
Sublists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Original list length n two sublists of length and over
two.
NOTE CONF
Breaking down into four sub lists of length n over
four.
NOTE CONF
Okay, eventually into lists which are, um, small enough that
you can use insertion sort on them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The height of this is log n okay.
NOTE CONF
And the and the time okay.
You've got n elements.
NOTE CONF
So it's n log n basically that's the that's the
explanation kind of hand-wavy explanation.
NOTE CONF
And that's what merge sort is always like that.
And quicksort is like that.
NOTE CONF
If um, if you end up, uh, you know, in,
in um, in the average case, right.
NOTE CONF
I've managed to finish on time.
Thank you for your attention.
NOTE CONF
Sorry this was so fast.
Uh, I hope it was interesting.
NOTE CONF
Mm.
Don't forget to come on Friday to the guest lecture.
NOTE CONF
It's going to be fun.
Hi, I'm still.
NOTE CONF
Going to write a function called remove Prop, which you
had asked him to ask us to do it.
NOTE CONF
The function remove prop for the last tutorial.
Remove or maybe.
NOTE CONF
Okay okay.
Yeah it was, it was, it was replacing or with
NOTE CONF
something else.
Yeah yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yeah with with and and negation.
NOTE CONF
Yes yes yes okay.
I have.
NOTE CONF
Done that.
I need to ask you.
NOTE CONF
This is correct.
No.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is only, um sorry.
Let me let.
NOTE CONF
Me turn.
This off.
NOTE CONF
This is this is turning it into a string.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
It wasn't.
No.
NOTE CONF
Strings.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
And not just this one.
Similar to this one.
NOTE CONF
Strings.
The first.
NOTE CONF
String.
Can.
NOTE CONF
I ask you.
I didn't ask you to do this because it's good
NOTE CONF
practice for this week's exercise.
You've already done so.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we have.
Uh, well, that's what this is.
NOTE CONF
That's the idea.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It was just the wrong thing that you're thinking about.
NOTE CONF
So I just.
I need to use this.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yes.
Because you got some of that.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Is it good for you?
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You took us back.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And then as you go down the hall.
And so all of those other problems wouldn't be solved.
NOTE CONF
But you do it.
You do those things.
NOTE CONF
It's one of those again.
But you only lost one of us.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of confusion.
And I think that's okay.
NOTE CONF
Forgive me.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
I'm just.
Glad.
NOTE CONF
I did it.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Not that I know of.
Um, I'm not sure.
NOTE CONF
I mean, the, uh, the hospital.
I don't.
NOTE CONF
I'm not aware of that as well.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF